---
title: How to read CSVs from the command line
date: 2024-08-28T10:00:00.000Z
keywords: unix
heroimage: /blog/images/testimage.png
---

Passing spreadsheets around as CSVs is pretty common these days, and I'm frankly quite thankful for this. With cloud-based office tools now being the norm, and proprietary formats getting increasingly difficult to operate on with our greasy unix tools, it's such a relief to get hold of a good ol' fashioned text file that I can mangle in the terminal.

There is nothing magical about CSV files, or comma-separated value files. They are text files with specifically formatted contents, nothing more. As text files, you can treat them like any other text file.

## Retrieve one or more rows from a CSV

Use the `tail` and `head` commands to chop off the top and bottom rows:

```sh
tail -n+3 test.csv | head -n 2
````

`tail -n+3` means "start at line 3", `head -n 2` means "take just the first 2 lines".

## Removing the column headers

Many CSVs include column headers on their first line

```csv
name,age,city
jon,32,oxford
safi,42,london
laura,28,manchester
```

This is primarily for human use, so when you're passing data from the CSV into other processes, you can skip this row using the `tail` approach we mentioned just a moment ago.

```sh
tail -n+1 test.csv
```

## Retrieve one or more columns from a CSV

You don't need any special apps; macOS and Linux both come with the tools you need to extract this data without much difficulty - the `cut` command is all you need

```sh
tail -n+1 test.csv | cut -d , -f 1,3

# => jon,oxford
#    safi,london
#    laura,manchester
```

`cut` is used for extracting specific sections of each line of a file. In this case, we tell it to use a comma as a delimeter to mark the start of a new field (`-d ,`) and return fields 1 and 3 (`-f 1,3`) 

